NFS
An nfs volume allows an existing NFS (Network File System) share to be mounted into a Pod. Unlike emptyDir,
which is erased when a Pod is removed, the contents of an nfs volume are preserved and the volume is merely unmounted.
This means that an NFS volume can be pre-populated with data, and that data can be shared between pods. NFS can be mounted by multiple writers simultaneously.
An NFS (Network File System) volume is a Kubernetes volume type that allows Pods to mount a directory from an external NFS server and use it as storage.

The NFS server is a separate machine (or VM) that exports a directory
Kubernetes Pods mount that directory over the network
The data lives outside the Pod and outside the node
volumes:
  - name: nfs-volume
    nfs:
      server: 10.0.0.50
      path: /nfs/shared-data
      Without NFS:

Each Pod has its own local storage
Data is duplicated
Hard to share state

With NFS:

One central storage location
All Pods read/write the same directory
Data persists even if Pods restart

CSI driver
A CSI driver (Container Storage Interface driver) is a standardized plugin that allows Kubernetes to connect with external storage systems 
(like cloud disks, network storage, or enterprise storage) in a consistent and portable way.
Before CSI, Kubernetes had in‑tree volume plugins:

Storage code was built inside Kubernetes
Adding or updating storage support required Kubernetes releases
Hard to maintain and extend

🔹 CSI solves this by moving storage logic outside Kubernetes.
A CSI driver is:

Software provided by a storage vendor
Runs outside the Kubernetes core
Implements the CSI specification
Allows Kubernetes to:

Create volumes
Attach/detach volumes
Mount/unmount volumes
Resize volumes
Take snapshots
>>Kubernetes talks to any storage system via its CSI driver.
Kubernetes needs storage
Kubernetes calls the CSI driver
CSI driver talks to the storage backend


Cloud provider
SAN / NAS
NFS / Ceph / NetApp / EBS / Azure Disk
Storage is created and mounted into the Pod

>How pv will bind with the pvc what are the components will come together?

When a PersistentVolumeClaim (PVC) is created, it represents a request for storage by a user or application. The API Server stores this PVC in etcd, and the PersistentVolume Controller (part of kube-controller-manager) continuously watches for new PVCs and available PersistentVolumes (PVs). The controller tries to find a matching PV based on storage size, access modes, and StorageClass. If a suitable PV exists, it binds the PV to the PVC; if not, and a StorageClass is specified, dynamic provisioning is triggered via a CSI driver, which creates new storage and a corresponding PV. Once bound, the PV and PVC are linked one‑to‑one.
Key points:

Binding is handled by the PV Controller
Matching is based on size, access mode, and StorageClass
Binding status changes to Bound for both PV and PVC

>To bring the external storage inside the cluster called pv how this pv works insife the cluster?
External storage (such as NFS, cloud disks, or SAN) is not physically moved into the Kubernetes cluster. Instead, Kubernetes creates a PersistentVolume (PV) object that acts as a logical representation of that external storage. The PV contains connection information (like server address, disk ID, or path) and storage properties, and this metadata is stored in etcd. The actual data remains on the external storage system. Inside the cluster, the PV works as an abstraction layer that allows Kubernetes to manage storage lifecycle independently of Pods, ensuring storage can persist even if Pods are recreated or rescheduled.
Key points:

PV is a logical abstraction, not physical storage
PV metadata lives in etcd
Actual data lives outside the cluster
CSI drivers handle communication with external storage

>How pvc will mount to the pod  and who is playing this role?

When a Pod references a PVC in its manifest, the Scheduler first assigns the Pod to a suitable worker node. On that node, the kubelet takes responsibility for preparing the Pod, including mounting the storage. The kubelet checks the PV bound to the PVC and communicates with the CSI Node Plugin (via gRPC over a UNIX socket) to perform storage‑specific operations such as attaching, formatting, and mounting the volume at the node level. Once mounted on the node, kubelet makes the volume available inside the container at the specified mount path, and the Pod starts successfully.
Key points:

Pod → PVC → PV mapping is already done before mounting
Scheduler selects the node
kubelet performs the mount operation
CSI Node Plugin handles storage‑specific logic


If you’d like, I can also:

Convert this into an interview‑ready answer
Add a diagram flow
Explain failure scenarios (Pending PVC, Mount errors)
