>When u execute kubectl command how the kubectl authenticates the cluster ?

    >> When you run a kubectl command, kubectl authenticates to the Kubernetes cluster through the API server,
using credentials and configuration stored locally (usually in a kubeconfig file).
Below is a clear, step‑by‑step explanation from command execution to authentication.
kubectl → kubeconfig → API Server → Authentication → Authorization → Admission → Response
Kubectl reads connection and authentication details from a kubeconfig file:
~/.kube/config
kubeconfig contains

clusters:  # Where the cluster is and how to trust it
users:     # How to authenticate
contexts:  # Cluster + user + namespace
Kubectl determines which cluster and user to use via the active context:
kubectl config current-context
kubectl sends the certificate with the API request
API server validates:

Certificate signature
Expiry
CN (Common Name) as username
O (Organization) as groups
Authentication inside the API server
The API server authenticates the request using authentication modules, in order:

Client certificate authentication
Bearer token authentication
OIDC authentication
Webhook authentication (external IAM)


>What is meant by context in kuubernetes how it plays a crucial role in authentication and authorization?

    >> n Kubernetes, a context is a logical configuration entry that tells kubectl which cluster to connect to, which identity to use, and which namespace to operate in.
It does not authenticate by itself, but it selects the authentication and authorization settings that will be used for every request.
A context is a named reference in kubeconfig that binds together:

Cluster (where to connect)
User (how to authenticate)
Namespace (default scope for requests)
Context chooses the user → the user defines the authentication mechanism
Authentication flow:

kubectl reads current-context
Context points to a user
User entry defines:
Client certificate OR
Token OR
Exec plugin (EKS/GKE/AKS)

kubectl sends those credentials to the API server
API server authenticates the request

Kubernetes RBAC operates after authentication.
Authorization depends on:

Authenticated username
Assigned groups
Requested namespace
Bound Roles / ClusterRoles
All of these are influenced by the context.

If dev-user has no RBAC access to kube-system, Kubernetes denies access.
✅ Same user
❌ Different namespace → different authorization outcome

>What is meant by certificate , key in kubernetes and where we can find all the certificate in masternode..what is the path?
    >>Kubernetes uses TLS (Transport Layer Security) for secure communication between all its components.
🔐 Private Key (.key)
Secret cryptographic file
Used to prove identity
Must be kept private

Certificates are files
file signed by a Certificate Authority (CA)
Confirms who the component is
Default location (kubeadm-based clusters)
/etc/kubernetes/pki/
/etc/kubernetes/pki/
├── ca.crt
├── ca.key
├── apiserver.crt
├── apiserver.key
├── apiserver-kubelet-client.crt
├── apiserver-kubelet-client.key
├── front-proxy-ca.crt
├── front-proxy-ca.key
├── front-proxy-client.crt
├── front-proxy-client.key
└── sa.key
└── sa.pub

tcd certificates (separate folder)
📁 /etc/kubernetes/pki/etcd/
etc/kubernetes/pki/etcd/
├── ca.crt
├── ca.key
├── server.crt
├── server.key
├── peer.crt
├── peer.key
├── healthcheck-client.crt
└── healthcheck-client.key

Certificates and keys in Kubernetes are TLS credentials used to securely authenticate and encrypt communication 
between cluster components, and on a kubeadm master node they are primarily stored under /etc/kubernetes/pki/.


>what is meant by OIDC and how we can give access to the cluster if it is on premises cluster how can we maintain the OIDC authentication?
    >>OIDC (OpenID Connect) is an identity layer built on top of OAuth 2.0.
It allows applications (like Kubernetes) to authenticate users via an external Identity Provider (IdP).
👉 In simple words:
OIDC lets Kubernetes trust an external login system (SSO) to verify users instead of using client certificates.\
Kubernetes does not manage human users internally.
OIDC enables Kubernetes to authenticate users via:

Username
Groups
Email
Claims from an external IdP
User → Identity Provider → Token (JWT) → API Server → RBAC
User logs in to IdP (browser / CLI plugin)
IdP authenticates user (password, MFA, LDAP, etc.)
IdP issues OIDC ID Token (JWT)
kubectl sends token to Kubernetes API
API server:

Validates token signature
Verifies issuer & audience
API server extracts:
username
groups
RBAC decides access
OIDC in Kubernetes allows authentication via an external identity provider, and for an on‑prem cluster it is implemented by 
    deploying an OIDC provider (like Keycloak), configuring the API server to trust it, and using RBAC to authorize users based on token claims.


>IF i have 10 Software Dev how can we provide the kubernetes cluster access to everyone?
   >>
what is role role binding cluster cluster binding?

    >>Role
✅ Defines permissions within a single namespace
A Role specifies what actions are allowed (get, create, delete, etc.) on which resources (pods, services, deployments) inside one namespace.
📌 Namespace‑scoped
RoleBinding
✅ Grants a Role to a user/group/service account in a namespace
A RoleBinding connects a Role to users or groups, giving them the permissions defined in the Role within that namespace.
📌 Namespace‑scoped

Defines permissions across the entire cluster
A ClusterRole specifies permissions that apply cluster‑wide or to non‑namespaced resources like nodes, namespaces, PVs.
ClusterRoleBinding
✅ Grants a ClusterRole to a user/group/service account across the cluster

A ClusterRoleBinding gives cluster‑wide access based on the ClusterRole.
📌 Cluster‑scoped
